2.2.10 MFRC522 RFID Module
==========================

Introduction
---------------

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) refers to technologies that use
wireless communication between an object (or tag) and interrogating
device (or reader) to automatically track and identify such objects.

Some of the most common applications for this technology include retail
supply chains, military supply chains, automated payment methods,
baggage tracking and management, document tracking and pharmaceutical
management, to name a few.

In this project, we will use RFID for reading and writing.

Components
----------

.. image:: media/list_2.2.7.png


Principle
---------

**RFID**

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) refers to technologies that
involve using wireless communication between an object (or tag) and an
interrogating device (or reader) to automatically track and identify
such objects. The tag transmission range is limited to several meters
from the reader. A clear line of sight between the reader and tag is not
necessarily required.

Most tags contain at least one integrated circuit (IC) and an antenna.
The microchip stores information and is responsible for managing the
radio frequency (RF) communication with the reader. Passive tags do not
have an independent energy source and depend on an external
electromagnetic signal, provided by the reader, to power their
operations. Active tags contain an independent energy source, such as a
battery. Thus, they may have increased processing, transmission
capabilities and range.

.. image:: media/image230.png


**MFRC522**

MFRC522 is a kind of integrated read and write card chip. It is commonly
used in the radio at 13.56MHz. Launched by the NXP Company, it is a
low-voltage, low-cost, and small-sized non-contact card chip, a best
choice of intelligent instrument and portable handheld device.

The MF RC522 uses advanced modulation and demodulation concept which
fully presented in all types of 13.56MHz passive contactless
communication methods and protocols. In addition, it supports rapid
CRYPTO1 encryption algorithm to verify MIFARE products. MFRC522 also
supports MIFARE series of high-speed non-contact communication, with a
two-way data transmission rate up to 424kbit/s. As a new member of the
13.56MHz highly integrated reader card series, MF RC522 is much similar
to the existing MF RC500 and MF RC530 but there also exists great
differences. It communicates with the host machine via the serial manner
which needs less wiring. You can choose between SPI, I2C and serial UART
mode (similar to RS232), which helps reduce the connection, save PCB
board space (smaller size), and reduce cost.


Schematic Diagram
-----------------

.. image:: media/image331.png


Experimental Procedures
-----------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: media/image232.png

**Step 2:** Install the :ref:`Spidev and MFRC522` libraries.

**Step 3:** Set up SPI (refer to :ref:`SPI Configuration` for more details. If you have
set SPI, skip this step.)


.. note::

    Turn on the SPI before starting the experiment, refer to :ref:`SPI Configuration` for details.
    
    And the :ref:`Spidev and MFRC522` libraries are also needed.

**Step 4:** Go to the folder of the code.

.. code-block::

    cd /home/pi/raphael-kit/python

**Step 5:** Run the executable file.

.. code-block::

    sudo python3 2.2.10_read.py
    sudo python3 2.2.10_write.py

.. note::

    * After running ``2.2.10_read.py``, it will print the ``id`` and ``text`` of your card in the shell.
    * After running ``2.2.10_write.py``, you need to write a message first, press ``Enter`` to confirm, and finally put your card on the MFRC522 RFID module to finish writing.

**Code Explanation**

.. code-block:: python

    reader = SimpleMFRC522()

Instantiate ``SimpleMFRC522()`` class.

.. code-block:: python

    reader.read()

This function is used to read card data. If the reading is successful, id and text will be returned.

.. code-block:: python

    reader.write(text)

This function is used to write information to the card, press ``Enter`` key to finish writing. ``text`` is the information to be written to the card.

Phenomenon Picture
------------------

.. image:: media/image233.jpeg