2.2.2 Thermistor
================

Introduction
------------

Just like photoresistor can sense light, thermistor is a temperature
sensitive electronic device that can be used for realizing functions of
temperature control, such as making a heat alarm.

Components
----------

.. image:: media/list_2.2.2_thermistor.png


Principle
---------

A thermistor is a thermally sensitive resistor that exhibits a precise
and predictable change in resistance proportional to small changes in
temperature. How much its resistance will change is dependent upon its
unique composition. Thermistors are the parts of a larger group of
passive components. And unlike their active component counterparts,
passive devices are incapable of providing power gain, or amplification
to a circuit.

Thermistor is a sensitive element, and it has two types: Negative
Temperature Coefficient (NTC) and Positive Temperature Coefficient
(PTC), also known as NTC and PTC. Its resistance varies significantly
with temperature. The resistance of PTC thermistor increases with
temperature ,while the condition of NTC is opposite to the former In
this experiment we use NTC.

.. image:: media/image325.png


The principle is that the resistance of the NTC thermistor changes with
the temperature of the outer environment. It detects the real-time
temperature of the environment. When the temperature gets higher, the
resistance of the thermistor decreases. Then the voltage data is
converted to digital quantities by the A/D adapter. The temperature in
Celsius or Fahrenheit is output via programming.

In this experiment, a thermistor and a 10k pull-up resistor are used.
Each thermistor has a normal resistance. Here it is 10k ohm, which is
measured under 25 degree Celsius.

Here is the relation between the resistance and temperature:

R\ :sub:`T` =R\ :sub:`N` exp\ :sup:`B(1/TK – 1/TN)`

**R\ T** is the resistance of the NTC thermistor when the temperature is
**T\ K**.

**R\ N** is the resistance of the NTC thermistor under the rated
temperature **T\ N**. Here, the numerical value of **R\ N** is 10k.

**T\ K** is a Kelvin temperature and the unit is K. Here, the numerical
value of **T\ K**\ is 273.15 + degree Celsius.

**T\ N** is a rated Kelvin temperature; the unit is K too. Here, the
numerical value of **T\ N** is 273.15+25.

And **B**\ (beta), the material constant of NTC thermistor, is also
called heat sensitivity index with a numerical value 3950.

**exp** is the abbreviation of exponential, and the base number e is a
natural number and equals 2.7 approximately.

Convert this formula
T\ :sub:`K`\ =1/(ln(R\ :sub:`T`/R\ :sub:`N`)/B+1/T\ :sub:`N`) to get
Kelvin temperature that minus 273.15 equals degree Celsius.

This relation is an empirical formula. It is accurate only when the
temperature and resistance are within the effective range.

Visit: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermistor, for more information.

Schematic Diagram
-----------------

.. image:: media/image323.png


.. image:: media/image324.png


Experimental Procedures
-----------------------

**Step 1:** Build the circuit.

.. image:: media/image202.png

**Step 2:** Go to the folder of the code.

.. code-block:: c

    cd /home/pi/raphael-kit/python/

**Step 3:** Run the executable file

.. code-block:: c

    sudo python3 2.2.2_Thermistor.py

With the code run, the thermistor detects ambient temperature which will
be printed on the screen once it finishes the program calculation.

**Code**

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/env python3
    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

    import RPi.GPIO as GPIO
    import ADC0834
    import time
    import math

    def init():
        ADC0834.setup()

    def loop():
        while True:
            analogVal = ADC0834.getResult()
            Vr = 5 * float(analogVal) / 255
            Rt = 10000 * Vr / (5 - Vr)
            temp = 1/(((math.log(Rt / 10000)) / 3950) + (1 / (273.15+25)))
            Cel = temp - 273.15
            Fah = Cel * 1.8 + 32
            print ('Celsius: %.2f °C  Fahrenheit: %.2f ℉' % (Cel, Fah))
            time.sleep(0.2)

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        init()
        try:
            loop()
        except KeyboardInterrupt:
            ADC0834.destroy()

**Code Explanation**

.. code-block:: python

    import math

There is a numerics library which declares a set of functions to compute
common mathematical operations and transformations.

.. code-block:: python

    analogVal = ADC0834.getResult()

This function is used to read the value of the thermistor.

.. code-block:: python

    Vr = 5 * float(analogVal) / 255
    Rt = 10000 * Vr / (5 - Vr)
    temp = 1/(((math.log(Rt / 10000)) / 3950) + (1 / (273.15+25)))
    Cel = temp - 273.15
    Fah = Cel * 1.8 + 32
    print ('Celsius: %.2f °C  Fahrenheit: %.2f ℉' % (Cel, Fah))

These calculations convert the thermistor values into centigrade degree
and Fahrenheit degree.

.. code-block:: python

    Vr = 5 * float(analogVal) / 255
    Rt = 10000 * Vr / (5 - Vr)

These two lines of codes are calculating the voltage distribution with
the read value analog so as to get Rt (resistance of thermistor).

.. code-block:: python

    temp = 1/(((math.log(Rt / 10000)) / 3950) + (1 / (273.15+25)))

This code refers to plugging Rt into the formula
**T\ K\ =1/(ln(R\ T/R\ N)/B+1/T\ N)** to get Kelvin temperature.

.. code-block:: python

    temp = temp - 273.15

Convert Kelvin temperature into centigrade degree.

.. code-block:: python

    Fah = Cel * 1.8 + 32

Convert the centigrade degree into Fahrenheit degree.

.. code-block:: python

    print ('Celsius: %.2f °C  Fahrenheit: %.2f ℉' % (Cel, Fah))

Print centigrade degree, Fahrenheit degree and their units on the
display.

Phenomenon Picture
------------------

.. image:: media/image203.jpeg